Osteoarthritis is a kind of arthritis caused
by damage to cartilage
and surrounding tissues in a joint.
Osteoarthritis can develop
in almost any joint,
and it commonly occurs in the knee.
Four bones come together at the knee,
the shinbone, or tibia,
the fibula, which runs along side the tibia,
the thighbone, or femur,
and the patella, or kneecap.
The knee joint itself is made up of the patella,
tibia, and femur.
Normally, the ends of the femur,
and tibia and back of the patella
are covered by smooth cartilage,
it acts like a cushion between the bones.
The cartilage also provides a smooth surface
for the interactive movements of the bones.
In osteoarthritis, the cushioning cartilage wears down.
It can fray, tear, or even wear entirely away.
The pressure on the ends of the bones increases,
and they may begin to rub against each other.
This can cause the ends of the bones to get thin.
New growths of bone, called spurs,
can form around the joint edges
as your body tries to redistribute
the weight to the damaged joint.
The space between the joint narrows.
Small holes can develop in the ends of the bone.
Small pieces of cartilage or bone
can break off and float around in the
tissue capsule surrounding the joint.
All of these changes can cause
pain and loss of function in the knee joint.